---
layout: post
title:  "Surface Roughness Induces Intraspecific Ocean Acidification Resistance"
author: "Patrick M Kiel"
date: '2024-05-11'
categories: [research]
description: "Online companion to Patrick Kiel's poster presented at the Microscale Ocean Biophysics Conference 7.0 on Heron Island, Australia."
output:
  md_document:
    variant: gfm
    preserve_yaml: TRUE
knit: (function(inputFile, encoding) {
  rmarkdown::render(inputFile, 
  encoding = encoding, 
  output_file = paste0('2024-05-11', "-",
                        gsub(pattern = "\\.Rmd$",
                              "", basename(inputFile))
                        ,".md"), 
  output_dir = "../_posts") })
always_allow_html: true
---

<style type="text/css">
img {
margin: 0 auto;
}
&#10;table {
    width: 90%;
    border: 0px solid #fff;
    border-collapse: collapse;
    overflow-x: auto;
    margin: 0 auto;
    display: block;
}
</style>
<!-- Place all chunks, text, etc here as you would a normal RMarkdown document -->

Thank you for checking out my poster at the
<a href="https://www.microscalemeeting.org/about-the-meeting.html" target="_blank">Microscale
Ocean Biophysics Meeting 7.0 at Heron Island, Australia.</a> My poster
is titled, “Surface Roughness Induces Intraspecific Ocean Acidification
Resistance”. This work was made possible by my co-authors and
supervisors including Vivek Prakash, Diego Lirman, Ian Enochs, Prannoy
Suraneni, Arash Sharifi, Amanda Oehlert, Ali Pourmand, Nash Soderberg,
and Albert Boyd.

# Overview

Coral restoration efforts are expanding globally to enhance gene flow
and coral cover on degraded reefs, aiming to buy time while climate
change and poor water quality are systematically addressed (Suggett *et
al.* 2024). These restoration programs have produced large-scale coral
nurseries where hundreds of genetically distinct individuals (“genets”)
from various species are propagated in common-garden environments.
Scientists have leveraged these opportune experiments to examine the
relative performance of the genets under identical environmental
conditions. This research has revealed the remarkable intraspecific
phenotypic diversity within these populations (Kiel *et al.* 2023).
Notably, there is a wide range of sensitivity to ocean acidification
(OA) in the branching species *Acropora cervicornis*. Some genets show
no physiological impairment or reduction in growth rates, while others
experience significant reductions, often exceeding 40%. This study seeks
to investigate whether a biophysical, form-function relationship
underlies this observed intraspecific OA sensitivity.

A coral’s shape is intimately linked to its physiological performance
and, ultimately, survival. The colony geometry is molded by feedback
loops with its environment and by competition with other species.
Further, through acclimation strategies and phenotypic plasticity,
fine-scale differences emerge across a continuous spectrum. These
morphological diversities are likely to have ecologically relevant
effects and arise from selective pressures from hydrodynamic stresses
(Madin 2005) as well as optimizations for particle capture (Helmuth and
Sebens 1993), photosynthetic performance (Hoogenboom *et al.* 2008;
Kramer *et al.* 2022), and mass-transfer of physiologically-limiting
metabolites, e.g., O2, pH, and dissolved inorganic carbon (Lesser *et
al.* 1994; Mass *et al.* 2010). Therefore, the balance of these
tradeoffs and competition among benthic organisms results in the
tremendous morphological diversity observed on coral reefs (Chappell
1980).

Morphology can be described on a continuous scale, borrowing insights
from geometry to integrate across morphological variation (Reichert *et
al.* 2017; Zawada *et al.* 2019a). Zawada *et al.* (2019a) propose six
metrics to constrain coral shape: sphericity and convexity (capturing
volume compactness), packing and fractal dimension (capturing surface
complexity), and the first moments of area and volume (capturing
top-heaviness). Ultimately, the goal is to understand how each of these
shape descriptors captures a coral’s physical interactions with its
environment to spur physiological or ecological consequences. Of
particular interest are the surface complexity metrics as these relate
to the turbulence of water flow at the coral’s surface and influence
mass flux (Stocking *et al.* 2018; Hossain and Staples 2020b, 2020a).

Corals with complex surfaces will experience increased turbulence and
develop smaller microenvironments or diffusion boundary layers (DBL).
These microenvironments arise from the localized attenuation of fluid
flow at the coral’s surface. Advection is slowed or completely halted at
these scales, and the diffusion rate dominates mass transfer (Patterson
1992; Shashar *et al.* 1996). Further, corals alter the chemistry of
this entrapped volume through the changing balance of light-mediated
carbon processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, calcification,
and dissolution (Albright *et al.* 2015; Silbiger and Sorte 2018).
During the day, a positive photosynthesis-to-respiration ratio increases
dissolved oxygen (DO) and reduces carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations.
During the night, photosynthesis is halted, and there is a net decrease
in DO and an increase in CO2. Between maximum net productivity shortly
following solar noon and maximum net respiration community shortly
before sunrise, the pH is a dynamic environment closely approximately
the changing photosynthetic active radiation experienced on the reef.

For example, Shashar *et al.* (1993) observed an oxygen microenvironment
around the relatively smooth species *Favia favus* and measured oxygen
concentrations greater than 300% air saturation in light and nearly
complete anoxia in darkness. Similarly, Kühl *et al.* (1995) measured pH
changes ± 0.5 units from bulk conditions under light and darkness within
a 300 μm DBL. On the other hand, comparably rougher, branching species
exhibited marginal to non-measureable metabolic changes in
microenvironment oxygen and pH due to the elevated turbulence and mass
flux (Kühl *et al.* 1995; Chan *et al.* 2016; Schoepf *et al.* 2018;
Comeau *et al.* 2019). A conceptual figure combining the changing light
conditions and various idealized surface roughnesses are summarized in
Figure 1 below.

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/conceptualPlot.png" alt="Conceptual changes of microenvironment pH due to surface roughness"/>

<h5>
Figure 1. pH variability within the microenvironment (pH<sub>DBL</sub>)
is proportional to the colony’s surface roughness, with smooth corals
having increased day-time highs and reduced night-time lows compared to
comparably rougher morphologies.
</h5>

The role of these microenvironments in modulating a coral’s response to
OA ultimately relies on this discrete water volume influencing the
calcifying fluid carbonate chemistry. The calcifying fluid (cf) is
originally seawater, which has been partially closed off in cell
junctions between the calicoblastic cells and the skeleton and is the
ultimate source of carbon and ions for calcification (Allemand *et al.*
2011; Tambutté *et al.* 2011). Since the microenvironment envelops the
coral colony and is the external seawater most proximal to the
calcifying fluid, the microenvironment’s concentration likely plays a
role in shaping the calcifying fluid carbonate chemistry. Further, the
calcifying fluid aragonite saturation state ($\Omega_{cf}$) repeats the
species-specific microenvironment pH pattern, with rough *Acropora sp.*
having a reduced mean and diel variability than a comparably smoother
*Pocillopora damicornis* (DeCarlo *et al.* 2019). Finally, the
microenvironment is the center of the proton flux hypothesis, which
postulates that OA reduces coral calcification due to the reduced
diffusive flux of protons out of the calcifying fluid and across the
microenvironment with increasing bulk seawater acidification (Jokiel
2011). Therefore, we are presented with two alternative hypotheses: 1)
Smooth corals will elevate pH and experience daytime refugia, thereby
maintaining elevated calcification rates (*sensu* Price *et al.* 2012)
2) Rough corals will increase mass transfer and experience the highest
night-time pH, thereby avoiding nightly dissolution

The goal of this experiment was to test which of these hypotheses
applies to intraspecifc OA sensitivity for *A. cervicornis*, a generally
sensitive species to OA.

# Methods

This experiment exposed three *A. cervicornis* genets to either
long-term low CO2 (LCO2; pH = 8.05) or high CO2 (HCO2; pH = 7.80)
experimental aquarias, with replication of genets and treatments. Corals
were collected from the [University of Miami/Rescue a Reef coral
nursery](https://rescueareef.earth.miami.edu/), and the experiment was
run at the [Experimental Reef
Laboratory](https://www.aoml.noaa.gov/experimental-reef-lab/) run by
NOAA/University of Miami’s Cooperative Institute for Marine and
Atmospheric Studies. A graphical overview of the experiment is presented
in Figure 2.

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/experimentalConditions.png" alt="Experimental timeline"/>

<h5>
Figure 2. Experimental timeline, with programmed diel pH variability of
0.025 units, reflective of bulk water changes on a reef from long-term
monitoring in the Florida Keys.
</h5>

Growth rates were monitored weekly via the buoyant weight technique and
were standardized to total surface area determined by a structured-light
three-dimensional scanner. Reproduced 3D models were also used to
calculate shape variables following methods outlined in Reichert *et
al.* (2017) and Zawada *et al.* (2019a). A principal components analysis
was used to identify the shape variables that described the most
variation within the data.

Following the four-month treatment, apical tips representing new
skeletal growth exclusively grown during treatment were sectioned and
prepared for geochemical analyses ($\delta^{11}B$) to serve as proxies
for the pH of the calcifying fluid.

Eighteen randomly selected skeletons (n= 3/treatment/genet) were left
intact following the growth phase to perform particle image velocimetry
(PIV) and particle tracking telemetry (PTV) analyses to calculate
turbulence statistics around the coral colonies. Further, the 3D models
were analyzed with computational fluid dynamics to calculate
three-dimensional turbulence statistics and aid the PIV/PTV analyses.
These data are still being collected and analyzed, and only a sample
plot is produced.

# Results

The three genets, collected from the same common-gardened nursery,
exhibited a conserved morphology, with genet-specific fractal dimensions
and packing, both of which describe surface complexity.

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/morphoPCA.png" alt="Morphometric PCA, highlighting genet-specific surface roughness"/>
<h5>
Figure 3. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of the morphological
variables highlights the three genet barycenters, which fall along the
fractal dimension (FD) eigenvector. Eigen vectors are colored (green \<
0.05) based on statistical significance between the three genets.
</h5>

There was an overall reduction in growth rates under the simulated OA
(HCO2) group, but the genets differentially experienced OA stress.

<img src="/notebook/images/ulinkGrowth2022/calcification graphs-1.png" alt="Genet specific growth rates"/>
<h5>
Figure 4. The three genets had differnetial sensitivity to OA stress
</h5>

We can dive into the calcifying fluid pH with boron isotopes, and we see
that calcifying fluid pH is almost inversely proportional to pH\_{cf}.
This falls in line with our conceptual plot where smoother corals
experience higher day-time highs, driving the mean pH upwards since the
change during the day is greater than the reduction at night.

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/phRegression.png" alt="Calcifying fluid pH is inversely proportional to surface roughness"/>
<h5>
Figure 5. Calcifying fluid pH is inversely proportional to surface
roughness
</h5>

However, these pH\_{cf} are not driving OA sensitivites, and rather
corals with increase roughness experienced reduced sensitivity. This may
be explained by the higher night-time lows in the rougher corals,
thereby night-time dissolution likely drives OA sensitivity for *A.
cervicornis*.

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/gRegression.png" alt="Growth rates scale with surface roughnes only under OA"/>
<h5>
Figure 6. Growth rates scale with surface roughnes only under OA
</h5>

# Conclusions

These preliminary data suggest elevated calcifying fluid pH may not
correlate with OA sensitivity in *A. cervicornis*. Rather, surface
roughness induced changes in microenvironment confers OA resistance,
with rougher corals having reduced reductions in growth rates under
ocean acidification. This relationship is only present under simulated
OA conditions and not under present-day scenarios. This is likely due to
the night-time lows in smooth corals exacerbates a pH threshold for the
species when the average bulk pH is 7.8. Further, smoother corals, with
higher day-time pH, have higher average calcifying fluid pH.

# Poster

<img src="/notebook/images/MOB7Conference/KielMOB7poster_final.png" alt="Poster presented at MOB7 in Heron Island, Australia"/>

# References

Chan NCS & Connolly SR. 2013. Sensitivity of coral calcification to
ocean acidification: a meta-analysis. Global Change Biology.
19(1):282–290. <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12011>

Kiel PM, Formel N, Jankulak M, Baker AC, Cunning R, Gilliam DS, Kenkel
CD, Langdon C, Lirman D, Lustic C, et al. 2023. Acropora Cervicornis
Data Coordination Hub, an Open Access Database for Evaluating Genet
Performance. Bulletin of Marine Science. 99(2):119–136.
<https://doi.org/10.5343/>

Price, N. N., Martz, T. R., Brainard, R. E. & Smith, J. E. Diel
variability in seawater pH relates to calcification and benthic
community structure on coral reefs. PloS one 7, e43843–e43843 (2012).

Suggett DJ, Guest J, Camp EF, Edwards A, Goergen L, Hein M, Humanes A,
Levy JS, Montoya-Maya PH, Smith DJ, et al. 2024. Restoration as a
meaningful aid to ecological recovery of coral reefs. npj Ocean Sustain.
3(1):1–4. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s44183-024-00056-8>
